# Terminology

The `ClimateMachine` documentation uses terminology from several disciplines. Below are some definitions of some of these terms. Please let us know via a github issue if there are other terms that are unclear or confusing to you.

## Software terms

* __Driver file__: a julia script which (a) specifies which
  [`BalanceLaw`](../APIs/BalanceLaws/BalanceLaws.md#ClimateMachine.BalanceLaws.BalanceLaw)
  is being used, (b) specifies changes to the default version
  of that model, (c) specifies initial and boundary conditions,
  (d) specifies numerical details related to timestep, grid,
  and frequency of output, and (e) runs the integration.
  Examples can be found in tutorials and experiments.
* __Source file__: a julia file containing code involved
  in implementing the choices made in a driver file. This
  is where the numerical methods related to solving the
  equations (e.g. the ODE time steppers, or the creation of
  the grid) are defined. Users typically only interact with
  functions defined in source code within a driver file by
  using arguments to those functions, unless they wish to
  develop the source code itself.
* __Kernel__: Functions which are launched on the compute device (i.e., the CPU or
  GPU) and run with an array of workitems or threads.
  `ClimateMachine.jl` uses
  [`KernelAbstractions.jl`](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/KernelAbstractions.jl)
  as its kernel language.
* __Callback__: Functions executed by the ODE integrator after each time step; see
  [`solve!`](../APIs/Numerics/ODESolvers/ODESolvers.md#ClimateMachine.ODESolvers.solve!).
  This allows the ability to inject custom behavior into the ODE
  integrators, such as diagnostic output, visualization, and apply
  filtering to the numerical solution.
  Several convenience functions exists specifying
  [callback](../APIs/Numerics/ODESolvers/ODESolvers.md#ClimateMachine.GenericCallbacks)
  frequency: number of simulation steps, every X simulation time, and every X wall clock seconds.
  The callback mechanism is inspired by the [callback mechanism of
  `DifferentialEquations.jl`.](https://diffeq.sciml.ai/stable/features/callback_functions/)

## Numerics

* __Balance Law__: The system of PDEs being solved, expressed in a particular form
  amenable to DG methods. Please see the [how-to-guide](../HowToGuides/Numerics/DGMethods/how_to_make_a_balance_law.md)
  or the [API](../APIs/BalanceLaws/BalanceLaws.md#ClimateMachine.BalanceLaws.BalanceLaw).
* __Courant number__: The ratio of the distance sound waves, diffusion, and other physical processes in your
  model travel or carry information in a timestep, relative to the resolution of your
  spatial discretization. This can typically be written in terms of physical constants,
  the grid size, and the time step, and is used for determining stability of
  ODE time steppers.
* __CFL limit__: A maximum value for the Courant number in order to guarantee convergence to the true solution.
  Given a spatial discretization, this determines the maximum timestep that can be used. The value
  of the CFL limit depends on the ODE solving algorithm used.



## Physics

* __Diurnal variation__: A periodic variation in Earth processes driven by the rotation of the Earth. Examples include
  heating of the Earth's surface due to solar radiation, or the semi-diurnal tidal cycle.
* __Shortwave radiation__: This refers to solar radiation, with intensity peaking in the visible part of the spectrum.
* __Longwave radiation__: This refers to the emitted infrared radiation of the Earth surface or atmosphere.
* __Advection/advective flux__: Advection is movement of some material/quantity by the bulk velocity of a fluid.
  In the `BalanceLaw` language, the advective flux of a prognostic variable is a first order flux.
* __Diffusion/diffusive flux__: Diffusion describes a process in which a material or quantity is moved, 
  or approximated as moved, due to random motion of particles. More generally, a diffusive flux is one
  generated by a gradient in
  concentration, temperature, or another quantity. A diffusive flux is a second order flux in the `BalanceLaw`
  framework.
* __Hyperdiffusion__: an explicit higher-order flux term representing horizontal diffusion. The `ClimateMachine`
  hyperdiffusive flux uses a fourth-order derivative, but it is included in a second order flux. It enforces the flow
  of enstrophy absorption at the smallest resolution, and models dissipation effects.

## Documentation

* __APIs__: This section details the parts of the source code that are visible
  to users wanting to run models and explains how to interact with
  and call them. API stands for
  [application programming interface](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/API);
  from Wikipedia, "It defines the kinds of calls or requests that can be 
  made, how to make them, the data formats that should be used, the 
  conventions to follow, etc."  
* __Tutorials__: Driver files with concrete examples showing how to run simple land,
  ocean, and atmosphere models, or how to use certain numerical functions.
* __Experiments__: Driver files with more complex models. These could be considered
  the starting point for research; they are not a part of the docs
  as they are constantly being updated.
* __How-to-guide__: Code and explanations for components used in models.
